---
layout: post
title:  "Thoughts on: Clair Obscure: Expedition 33"
date:   2026-3-14
categories: mediator feature
tags: featured
image: \assets\article_images\exp33-1.jpg
---

##Summary:

	Clair Obscure: Expedition 33 is a traditional turnbased role-playing game with overworld exploration. The game opens following the story of Gustave, in a city called Lumiere where every year the “Paintress”, a larger than life statue on an island across the sea, lowers the number on the monolith she guards marking the age at which the townspeople will be erased from existence. Every year those from Lumiere for whom it will be their last year to live set off on a voyage to try and discover the secrets of the Monolith and to stop the Paintress. The game follows the traditional linear story line play pattern known to rpgs, with a main story quest to follow, with options side story with smaller quest lines to follow throughout the game. 

##Gameplay:

	If you have played Final Fantasy or Pokemon you will be right at home. The game follows the traditional format almost to a T– but with the addition of a parrying and dodge mechanic. This may seem odd but it created my favourite rpg experience of all time. Instead of having to grind for levels or items to be strong enough you can just practice the fight you are stuck on. Adding quick time blocking to turnbased combat creates a wonderful experience. Long gone are the days of spending hours running around in tall grass to train your pokemon to get on level with the next gym. You can just sit there and get good if you want, or you can go train and make the fight easier for yourself. The amount of agency this one mechanic gives the player over how they want to experience the game is one of the best design decisions I have seen in modern gaming. You have the ability to go level and upgrade your gear and reduce the number of turn cycles it takes to beat enemies, be able to miss more blocks and still come out on top of the fight, but you also can completely ignore that. One of the things that draws me to the Metroidvania genre (see: Silksong) is the pattern learning aspect of boss fights. I love the feeling of coming out on top after struggling through multiple attempts at a challenging fight; bashing my head against a boss fight for hours until I have learned how to beat it brings me joy. I recognize this isn’t for everyone though and without having to jump through any hoops Expedition 33 seamlessly allows for me to get the experience I enjoy while not forcing it on someone who isn’t looking for that. When I think about my experience playing this game the Golgra fight sums it up perfectly for me. It is an optional boss fight to unlock additional weapons. The fight is 20 levels above where you the player currently are, and yet nothing stops you from challenging her. I spent two hours and fifteen minutes on this fight learning the pattern, having to reset every time I missed a single block in her multi hit combos, and felt immensely rewarded at the end when I gained a weapon 10 levels above my current one when I beat her. While I could have gone and grinded the traditional way for this, likely in less time, I didn’t have to.

 That is not to say the game is perfect. I think the game was missing a pretty big element of player expression in the form of build identities for the cast of five characters. New weapons had different abilities but (excluding one weapon for Sciel) they didn’t feel transformative to the character. The weapons all felt homogenized with slightly different passives that only ever made minor differences to skill order, but not especially to what skills you wanted to use. This led to what I think is the game's biggest flaw–  how weapon damage scaling worked. Each weapon has two corresponding player stats that its damage scales with. As a result the weapons that scale with speed (and preferably damage as its secondary, though the secondary scaling stat was less important) ended up being significantly better than all other choices. If you can fully spec into a stat that increases how often you get to have a turn compared to the enemy, and have it significantly boost your damage, why wouldn’t you? The other weapons rarely enable any specific builds or combos that make it worth the trade off. So if you end up with a party of three who are all speed maxed there isn’t a downside. Because the Picto system (armor equivalent system) can provide you with Health and Defense if you really want, you can get away with not having to parry well either. It felt like no matter what skill setup I chose, my weapon was always the same speed scaling option for every character. 

The other major mechanic worth commenting on is how the map was handled. We get the Final Fantasy Overworld map systems, where you can explore a scaled down version of the map with different locations to enter that then load you into a new zone to explore. While the player is given the ability to look at the overworld map, each zone is mapless. You are supposed to get lost and backtrack as you explore and learn the new environment you have been put in. I think this is a fantastic choice as it encourages you to go through the nooks and crannies and find secrets and side events you might otherwise miss, but it also thematically puts you in the shoes of the character. As they explore and get lost trying to find the secrets of the island, so do you. 


##Packaging:

	Expedition 33’s packaging is what makes it, in my opinion, the greatest game of all time. The game looks stunning, taking full advantage of what Unreal Engine 5 has to offer. Its world is detailed and expressive with amazing sound design in each location that really helps flesh out the feeling of being in new places. The soundtrack is a masterpiece, expertly building the emotional moments of the game, and sounding phenomenal while doing it. It is the only game where I have been so stunned by how the music was resonating with me that I had to stop what I was doing to sit there just to listen to it. The first time I heard “Une Vie à t’aimer” during the fight with Renoir I stopped selecting what actions I would take so I could sit there and appreciate the moment mid-fight while the game waited for me to make my choice. It is also a game where I would spend a few minutes after launching the game to sit listening to the main menu music because of how pretty it is. The soundtrack holds its own as an individual piece of art. I can put it on in the car, or play it on speakers at work, and often have people comment on their enjoyment of it. 
Despite being an indie title, and the first game from Sandfall, it stands head and shoulders above comparable AAA titles. To top it all off, the game has one of my favourite stories I have played. The world and its characters feel so full of life, the story is original, emotional, and each act had meaningful progression and twists that changed how you thought about what you had experienced so far. While you have recent titles such as Baldur’s Gate 3 which have larger stories, for me Expedition 33 outshines it in the depth of emotion the story conveys. When I started my degree I would talk about what I dreamed of making in a video game, of why I thought it was a beautiful medium to tell stories in, but never had something I could point to and say “this is what I dream of making”. Expedition 33 changed that.
